>> Nina Zakharenko: Okay, so
covered all the basic data types,
now let's talk about functions.
And again, I'm just putting the comments
in here to make it easier for
you guys to read you don't have
to put them into your own code.
Functions help us organize our
code in a way that's reusable and
accepts arguments and
even provides defaults where needed.
>> Nina Zakharenko: And
the purpose of these functions,
it's to make our code reusable, right?
So if we find ourselves copying and
pasting the same thing, the same code
multiple times all over a place, that's a
good sign that a function might help you.
Very quickly, the anatomy of a function,
this is the recipe for
defining a Python function.
We always start the function
with the keyword def,
followed by a space, that tells Python
that we're starting a function definition.
Then we come up with a name for
the function, so this isn't a good name
but for now let's just call it fool.
Then we always need
the opening parenthesis and
optionally we can type in
some arguments here or
if our function does not accept arguments
we type in the closing parenthesis.
>> Nina Zakharenko: If it had arguments,
we would separate those with a comma.
Okay, lastly, a colon,
that's our recipe for a function.
Now, if we press Enter in the REPL,
we'll see these three dots again,
it's waiting for more input.
Now for those of you who've come from
other languages, let's say JavaScript,
what did you not see in
the function definition?
>> Class: Brackets.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Brackets,
gold star, exactly right
Python doesn't use brackets
to differentiate between
the scope of what belongs to
a function and what doesn't.
In Python instead we indicate
that with indentation,
so, important concept you'll see again and
again.
But to put in the contents of
our function, we can just press
tab to insert one level of indentation.
What's that?
>> Class: Type eight I think just spaces.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Yes, so
in the REPL you can hit tab to just
kind of quickly type things in.
In your Python files,
I recommend using spaces,
so when you use an ID, if you hit
tab while you're typing your Python
code, it'll just convert it
into spaces under the hood, so.
And to verify that,
if you look at the blue bar down here,
you'll see mine says,
spaces 4, if yours says tab,
you might wanna change that but
not a big deal right now.
Okay, so we're in the REPL we hit tab and
now we're gonna have to use
that print function, right?
Because when we call our function in
the REPL if it doesn't do anything,
if it just declares some variables,
we're not gonna see any output.
So let's use print and print out hello.
>> Nina Zakharenko: And
let's press Enter again.
And you'll see here that
Python is still in this,
or the Python REPL is still in this dot,
dot, dot mode it's still waiting for
more input, that's because we can
type in more stuff to our function.
When we decide that we're done with it,
in the REPL,
we'll want to hit Enter an extra time
until we see these three brackets again,
saying that our prompt is ready for input.
To call our function we
type the name of it,
if it accepts arguments
we'd wanna pass those in,
if it doesn't like in the case of fool,
we can just pass in empty parentheses.
And when i call that function i see
my result result hello, cool right?
Okay so,
functions can accept no arguments,
in this case the function
also returns nothing.
The print statement, it just does
something that displays text, right?
But in our production code lets
say we probably don't have
print statements littered
all over the place, right,
we know what the code does and so
we want function to return a value.
So let's make new function and
call it, meaning of life,
and it's just two empty parenthesis and
a colon.
And our function is gonna return a value
42, press enter and enter again.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Now we can
call the meaning of life function,
and we'll see our returned value 42.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Just to be
very clear on the distinction,
I'm gonna make a new variable
that says call fool and
I'm gonna assign the value
of calling foo to it.
If I checked what the value
of that variable is,
we'll see that there’s nothing there,
a non-type, right?
This function prints something out and
does something but
does not return anything.
If I set the result of calling,
the meaning of life function,
to the variable x,
what will the value of x be?
>> Nina Zakharenko: 42.
>> Class: 42.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Cool,
whether your function returns arguments or
not depends on what it does, right?
Not all functions need to return anything,
it's optional.
Our functions can also accept arguments,
so
let's say I had a function
called add numbers.
After my empty parenthesis, I'm gonna
put in the variable that I expect, so
I'm gonna expect two numbers, x, and y.
I'm gonna separate them with a comma,
put in my closing parenthesis,
and then put in the colon.
That means that no matter what
my function gets called in,
within the scope of my function,
those variables will be called x and y.
So I hit enter for new line, I hit tab and
then I'm gonna return x + y.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Now I can call
this function with any numbers and
it will return the result of adding them.
I can also set variables here
with some numbers in them,
say a and b, I can call my
add_numbers function with a and b.
But remember, add_numbers doesn't
know anything about a and
b, and it doesn't care, right?
Add_numbers only knows about two arguments
and within the scope of the function,
they're gonna be called x and y.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Now, if we forget this
recipe for trying to define a function
in Python, Python's gonna help
us out with the syntax error.
So let's try to create some functions,
I'm gonna call this one, oops,
and if I forget the colon and
press enter syntax error,
invalid syntax with a helpful arrow
pointing to the end of oops, okay?
If I forget, my parenthesis syntax error,
invalid syntax, right?
Makes sense,
we're not following the recipe.
>> Nina Zakharenko: The recipe for our
function contents, so we have a new line,
we have an indentation, and
then we can have one or
more lines in there, right, so
we've seen some simple functions.
But let's make a new one called greeting.
>> Nina Zakharenko: And
our greeting will take a name.
>> Nina Zakharenko: You can also define
a new variable within the scope of
this function.
>> Nina Zakharenko: And I'm gonna make
my greeting, hello, but you can make it
whatever you want and then we're gonna
return the greeting plus the name.
So to add more content to the function,
remember you always need to indent,
everything that is indented one level
under the function belongs to it.
Press enter twice call greeting
with Nina and it'll return,
hello Nina, remember that return
statement is optional and
if you don't provide one,
the function just returns none.
>> Nina Zakharenko: You can also kind of
very occasionally, you can use a return
statement that has no value,
so you'll see that in kind of,
when we talk about control flow
you'll see that a little bit more.
But let's say I have a function fool here,
and
I set x equal to 5 and
I type return with no value, right?
It's still valid Python syntax, but
if I call let's say x is equal to fool,
if I check the type of x,
it's gonna be NoneType.
>> Nina Zakharenko: This return statement
will return from anywhere within
the function In the REPL you
don't get helpful hints,
like you do when typing
a Python file in the IDE.
In the IDE if you put anything
after the return statement and
you've installed the linter like we did
in the beginning, you'll see an error
about unreachable code or not an error,
but a warning about unreachable code.
So, if there's no control
flow to your program,
everything after the return is ignored.